CsWinRT/WinUI Authoring Support (#1111)
microsoft/CsWinRT: docs/authoring.md

This section describes the steps needed to consume a C#/WinRT component for the following scenarios:

- [C# desktop applications](#consuming-from-c-applications) 

> - [C++ desktop applications](#consuming-from-c-applications)

Reviewer: these now point to the same anchor because markdown removes the ++ and # signs

- [Windows App SDK applications](#windows-app-sdk-applications)
- [Out of process components](#consuming-an-out-of-process-component)

### Consuming from C# applications

> Consuming a C#/WinRT component from C#/.NET apps is supported by both package reference or project reference. This scenario is equivalent to consuming any ordinary C# class library and does not involve WinRT activation in most cases. This scenario is fully supported on .NET 6 and later.

Reviewer: in most cases -> can we be more precise? what are the scenarios where it does involve winrt activation?

Author: IIUC, We are referring to out of process support, a few sections down, where you need a runtimeconfig.json. There are no scenarios where you need a manifest file for c#. Correct me if I'm wrong @angelazhangmsft  :)

I'll make the clarification in the docs

**Note:** With C#/WinRT 1.3.5 or later, project references to a C#/WinRT component require .NET 6.

### Consuming from C++ applications

Consuming a C#/WinRT component from a C++/WinRT desktop application is supported by either NuGet package reference or project reference.

- **Package Reference**: In Visual Studio, right-click on the project in Solution Explorer and click **Manage NuGet packages** to search for and install the component package.

- **Project Reference**: In Visual Studio, right-click on the project in Solution Explorer and click **Add** -> **Reference**. Select the C#/WinRT component project under the **Projects** node. 
  - Note: If your authored component is built with C#/WinRT version 1.3.3 or earlier, you also need a file reference to the `*.winmd` generated in the authored component's output directory. To add a file reference, right-click on the project in Solution Explorer and click **Add** -> **Reference**. Select the file from the **Browse** node. 

#### Manifest Class Registration

> Consuming a C#/WinRT component from a C++/WinRT desktop application requires manifest class registrations. The specified activatable Windows Runtime class registrations will direct activation of the component’s classes at runtime. There are two different ways to do this depending on if the application is a packaged (with MSIX) or unpackaged C++ app:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Consuming a C#/WinRT component from a C++/WinRT desktop application requires adding manifest class registrations to the application. The specified activatable Windows Runtime class registrations will direct activation of the component’s classes at runtime. There are two different ways to do this depending on whether the application is a packaged (with MSIX) or unpackaged C++ app:
```

      </Extensions>
      ```

      See the [Simple C#/WinRT component sample](../src/Samples/AuthoringDemo) (specifically the WinUI3CppApp) for an example.

  - For **unpackaged C++ apps**: The app consumer needs to create an [application manifest file](https://docs.microsoft.com/windows/win32/sbscs/application-manifests) (also known as a "fusion manifest") that follows the naming: `<MyNativeAppName>.exe.manifest`. See this [sample manifest file](https://github.com/microsoft/CsWinRT/tree/master/src/Samples/AuthoringDemo/CppConsoleApp/CppConsoleApp.exe.manifest) for an example.

      Follow these steps to add an application manifest file to your project:

      1. In Visual Studio, right click on the project node under **Solution Explorer** and click **Add -> New Item**. Search for the **Text File** template and name your file `<MyNativeAppName>.exe.manifest`.

      2. Add your activatable class registrations to the manifest file. Below is an example with a C#/WinRT component called `MyAuthoredComponent` and activatable classes `WinRTComponent.Class*`. Note that `WinRT.Host.dll` must be specified as the file name, without a relative path.

            ```xml

>             <?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>

Reviewer: does the manifest not need a `<supportedOS>` entry for unpackaged?

Author: I'm not aware of this, perhaps thats why the unpackged scenario doesn't work? When I made the unpackaged scenario I followed the [docs here](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/apps/winui/winui3/create-your-first-winui3-app?pivots=winui3-unpackaged-cpp#unpackaged-create-a-new-project-for-an-unpackaged-c-or-c-winui-3-desktop-app).

Reviewer: also @stevewhims for context

                                  xmlns="urn:schemas-microsoft-com:winrt.v1" />
                <activatableClass name="MyAuthoredComponent.Class2"
                                  threadingModel="both"
                                  xmlns="urn:schemas-microsoft-com:winrt.v1" />
              </file>
            </assembly>
            ```

      3. Modify the project to include the manifest file in the output when deploying the project. Right-click on the file in **Solution Explorer**, select **Properties**, and set the **Content** property to **True** using the drop-down arrow on the right.

### Windows App SDK Applications

Authoring and consuming WinUI types in Windows App SDK applications is in development and is supported with some exceptions.
Component authors can implement WinUI types using the Windows App SDK C# class library project template. 
Components can be consumed by application projects that reference the Windows App SDK.

#### Support Matrix

The following table outlines the Windows App SDK application types that are supported when consuming C#/WinRT authored components implementing WinUI types:

- ✅ means the scenario works

> - 🟨 means the scenario partially works (i.e. with specific limitations)

Reviewer: where can I learn more about the specific limitations? as a developer I'd like to be able to assess whether what I want to do will work, so having the limitations documented/called out seems important.

Author: Addressed!

- 🟥 means the scenario does not work
- Note: "WAP" refers to the usage of a separate Windows Application Packaging Project in packaged apps.

> |Application Type|Project or Package Reference|Supported?|

Reviewer: I like the table approach though I'd recommend doing it as follows:

### C++

|  | Project Reference | Package Reference |
|:--|:-:|:-:|
| Packaged | ✅ | 🟨 |
| Packaged with WAP | 🟥 | 🟥 | 
| Unpackaged | 🟥 | 🟨 |

then another table for C# following it

This section describes the steps needed to consume a C#/WinRT component for the following scenarios:

- [C# desktop applications](#consuming-from-c-applications) 
- [C++ desktop applications](#consuming-from-c-applications-1)
- [Windows App SDK applications](#windows-app-sdk-applications)
- [Out of process components](#consuming-an-out-of-process-component)

### Consuming from C# applications

> Consuming a C#/WinRT component from C#/.NET apps is supported by both package reference or project reference.

Reviewer 2: Perf offline discussion, might want to reword this as both lines seem to say the same.  Also since you are saying both, might want to use and rather than or.

> Consuming a C#/WinRT component from C#/.NET apps is supported by both package reference or project reference.

Reviewer 2: Perf offline discussion, might want to reword this as both lines seem to say the same.  Also since you are saying both, might want to use and rather than or.

      ``` xml
      <Extensions>
        <Extension Category="windows.activatableClass.inProcessServer">
          <InProcessServer>
            <Path>WinRT.Host.dll</Path>
            <ActivatableClass ActivatableClassId="MyAuthoredComponent.Class1" ThreadingModel="both" />
            <ActivatableClass ActivatableClassId="MyAuthoredComponent.Class2" ThreadingModel="both" />
          </InProcessServer>
         </Extension>
      </Extensions>
      ```

      See the [Simple C#/WinRT component sample](../src/Samples/AuthoringDemo) (specifically the WinUI3CppApp) for an example.

  - For **unpackaged C++ apps**: The app consumer needs to create an [application manifest file](https://docs.microsoft.com/windows/win32/sbscs/application-manifests) (also known as a "fusion manifest") that follows the naming: `<MyNativeAppName>.exe.manifest`. See this [sample manifest file](https://github.com/microsoft/CsWinRT/tree/master/src/Samples/AuthoringDemo/CppConsoleApp/CppConsoleApp.exe.manifest) for an example.

      Follow these steps to add an application manifest file to your project:

>       1. In Visual Studio, right click on the project node under **Solution Explorer** and click **Add -> New Item**. Search for the **Text File** template and name your file `<MyNativeAppName>.exe.manifest`.

Reviewer 2: Wasn't there also a manifest file template?  Is that not better?

>       1. In Visual Studio, right click on the project node under **Solution Explorer** and click **Add -> New Item**. Search for the **Text File** template and name your file `<MyNativeAppName>.exe.manifest`.

Reviewer 2: Wasn't there also a manifest file template?  Is that not better?

Author: Don't think so, this is how we've always done it

Reviewer: there is a manifest item template, but only for managed projects, for some reason....
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/22989529/157344614-8ddf074d-b44c-47cf-bdd2-0bd8d32d7807.png)

                                  threadingModel="both"
                                  xmlns="urn:schemas-microsoft-com:winrt.v1" />
                <activatableClass name="MyAuthoredComponent.Class2"
                                  threadingModel="both"
                                  xmlns="urn:schemas-microsoft-com:winrt.v1" />
              </file>
            </assembly>
            ```

      3. Modify the project to include the manifest file in the output when deploying the project. Right-click on the file in **Solution Explorer**, select **Properties**, and set the **Content** property to **True** using the drop-down arrow on the right.

### Windows App SDK Applications

Authoring and consuming WinUI types in Windows App SDK applications is in development and is supported with some exceptions.
Component authors can implement WinUI types using the Windows App SDK C# class library project template. 
Components can be consumed by application projects that reference the Windows App SDK.

#### Support Matrix

The following table outlines the Windows App SDK application types that are supported when consuming C#/WinRT authored components implementing WinUI types:

> - ✅ means the scenario works

Reviewer 2: Consider removing _means the_ and just say Scenario works.

> - ✅ means the scenario works

Reviewer 2: Consider removing _means the_ and just say Scenario works.

- 🟨 means the scenario partially works (i.e. with specific limitations)
- 🟥 means the scenario does not work

> - Note: "WAP" refers to the usage of a separate Windows Application Packaging Project in packaged apps.

Reviewer 2: May also want to say Packaged without WAP refers to the WinUI preview MSIX support for it.

> - Note: "WAP" refers to the usage of a separate Windows Application Packaging Project in packaged apps.

Reviewer 2: May also want to say Packaged without WAP refers to the WinUI preview MSIX support for it.

Reviewer 3: Packaged without WAP is not a preview feature anymore I believe - https://docs.microsoft.com/windows/apps/windows-app-sdk/single-project-msix?tabs=csharp

|C++ Unpackaged|Project Reference| 🟥 | [#1116](https://github.com/microsoft/CsWinRT/issues/1116) |
|C++ Packaged|Package Reference|🟨 | [#1118](https://github.com/microsoft/CsWinRT/issues/1118) |
|C++ Packaged with WAP |Package Reference| 🟥 | [#1123](https://github.com/microsoft/CsWinRT/issues/1123) |
|C++ Unpackaged|Package Reference|🟨 | [#1118](https://github.com/microsoft/CsWinRT/issues/1118) |

##### C#
|Application Type|Project or Package Reference|Supported?|Tracking issue|
|:--|:-:|:-:|:-:|
|C# Packaged|Project Reference| ✅ |
|C# Packaged with WAP|Project Reference| ✅ |
|C# Unpackaged|Project Reference|🟥| [#1116](https://github.com/microsoft/CsWinRT/issues/1116) |
|C# Packaged|Package Reference| 🟨 | [#1118](https://github.com/microsoft/CsWinRT/issues/1118) |
|C# Packaged with WAP |Package Reference| 🟨 | [#1118](https://github.com/microsoft/CsWinRT/issues/1118) |
|C# Unpackaged|Package Reference|🟥 | [#1116](https://github.com/microsoft/CsWinRT/issues/1116) |

#### Consumption of WinUI controls from C++ apps

If a C++ app is consuming a component that provides a custom user control, there are a few extra configuration steps:

> 1. In the app's `pch.h` header file, add the following line:

Reviewer 2: Make note somewhere MyAuthoredComponent should be renamed to their component name.

> 1. In the app's `pch.h` header file, add the following line:

Reviewer 2: Make note somewhere MyAuthoredComponent should be renamed to their component name.

This section describes the steps needed to consume a C#/WinRT component for the following scenarios:

- [C# desktop applications](#consuming-from-c-applications) 

> - [C++ desktop applications](#consuming-from-c++-applications)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [C++ desktop applications](#consuming-from-c-applications-1)
```

- [C# desktop applications](#consuming-from-c-applications) (.NET 5 or later)
- [Packaged applications](#Consuming-from-packaged-applications)
- [Out of process components](#Consuming-an-out-of-process-component)

> - [Windows App SDK Support](#Using-Windows-App-SDK)

Reviewer 3: How about "Windows App SDK applications"? 

We may also want to note that these are C# and C++ desktop applications/distinguish these from the first 2 scenarios.

1. In Visual Studio, right click on the project node under **Solution Explorer** and click **Add -> New Item**. Search for the **Text File** template and name your file `YourNativeApp.exe.manifest`.

2. Add your activatable class registrations to the manifest file. Below is an example with a C#/WinRT component `MyAuthoredComponent` and activatable classes `WinRTComponent.Class*`. Note that `WinRT.Host.dll` must be specified as the file name, without a relative path.

>       ```xml

Reviewer: btw / for future reference that this is automatable if the types exist in a winmd (see the MT task I have in the targets file for the nuget package called `Unpackaged`)

Reviewer: see https://github.com/asklar/xaml-islands/blob/main/build/Unpackaged.targets#L8-L38

Author: great!! I think that would help us with https://github.com/microsoft/CsWinRT/issues/789

C#/WinRT supports authoring out-of-process components that can be consumed by Windows Runtime compatible languages. Currently, consuming an out-of-process component is supported for managed C# apps with the use of a packaging project. This scenario requires creating a `WinRT.Host.runtimeconfig.json` file, as demonstrated in the [background task component sample](https://github.com/microsoft/CsWinRT/tree/master/src/Samples/BgTaskComponent). Native C++ consumption of out-of-process C# components is not fully supported yet.

### Using Windows App SDK

Authoring WinUI types with C#/WinRT is in development and is supported with some exceptions.
Component authors can implement WinUI types using the Windows App SDK class library template. 

> Components are consumed by projects made from the various other Windows App SDK templates.

Reviewer 3: How about "Components can be consumed by application projects that reference the Windows App SDK"?  

Someone could have an existing project (e.g. WPF) that references the Windows App SDK, not necessarily created from the templates

> When using a project reference, projects made from the following templates are not supported currently: C++ app with WAP, C++ Unpackaged, and C# Unpackaged. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When referencing a C# authored component as a project reference, the following application configurations are not supported currently: 
- C++/WinRT applications using a separate Windows Application Packaging Project
- C++ Unpackaged applications
- C# Unpackaged applications 

```

> Using a package reference to the authored component will work unless authoring a user control, which is not supported yet.

Reviewer 3: Do we need to call out that Unpackaged apps and/or apps using the Windows Application Packaging Project are not supported using a package reference also?

> When authoring a custom user control, consuming the component via NuGet package is not supported currently.

Reviewer 3: is this the same as the sentence before?

If a C++ app is consuming a component that provides a custom user control, an additional entry needs to be made in the `pch.h` header file and in the manifest. 

For the `pch.h` file, add `#include <winrt/MyAuthoredComponent.MyAuthoredComponent_XamlTypeInfo.h>`.

> For the manifest, add an additional `ActivatableClass` entry for `MyAuthoredComponent.MyAuthoredComponent_XamlTypeInfo.XamlMetaDataProvider`.

Reviewer 3: Probably add the code snippet here so folks can copy/paste?

Reviewer: You can link to the existing instructions here: https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/uwp/cpp-and-winrt-apis/troubleshooting#symptoms-and-remedies
See the last entry in that list

Author: @asklar From what I see, this is needed for activating XAML types; do you have additional info on why we need this?

Reviewer: as far as the xamltype info header, this is necessary for things like XAML `Binding` to work; @RealTommyKlein can probably say better words :D
the activatable class entry is necessary to tell winrt "this is the library that knows how to create this type"

> When using a template for a WAP-style project, the manifest entries should be added to the `Package.appxmanifest`. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When consuming the component from a packaged application, the manifest entries should be added to the `Package.appxmanifest` file. You will need to right click on the file and select **Open With** -> **XML (Text Editor)** in order to edit the file.
```

Reviewer 3: I used Package.appxmanifest for both packaged (non-WAP) and packaged (with WAP)

Otherwise, follow the steps above for adding a `Foo.exe.manifest` -- if you get an error in the linker (LNK) 

> typically this is due to multiple manifests being found, and `app.manifest` can be removed to resolve the issue.

Reviewer 3: Can we add this specific error to the troubleshooting section?

> There's no inherent need to create a `runtimeconfig.json`; typically the one automatically created suffices.

Reviewer 3: I don't think we need to explicitly say this unless there are specific scenarios to call out where you need to create this file?

Author: I agree this might not be necessary, I added it to try to add clarification after the discussion in this post - https://github.com/microsoft/CsWinRT/issues/1088

C#/WinRT supports authoring out-of-process components that can be consumed by Windows Runtime compatible languages. Currently, consuming an out-of-process component is supported for managed C# apps with the use of a packaging project. This scenario requires creating a `WinRT.Host.runtimeconfig.json` file, as demonstrated in the [background task component sample](https://github.com/microsoft/CsWinRT/tree/master/src/Samples/BgTaskComponent). Native C++ consumption of out-of-process C# components is not fully supported yet.

### Windows App SDK Applications

Authoring WinUI types with C#/WinRT is in development and is supported with some exceptions.
Component authors can implement WinUI types using the Windows App SDK class library template. 
Components can be consumed by application projects that reference the Windows App SDK.

> When referencing a C# authored component via project reference, the following application types are not supported currently:

Reviewer: from reading this I know what _not_ to do but not what to do. Can we also list which configuration _is_ supported?

Author: thanks! sure, added

Reviewer 3: shoudl we list what is supported first?

Author: Sure!

- Project reference support (from C++ and C# apps) for C#/WinRT authored components is available with .NET 6. Referencing a C#/WinRT authored component by project reference in a C# app is **not supported with .NET 5**.

- Authoring issues are [tagged under the *authoring* label](https://github.com/microsoft/CsWinRT/issues?q=is%3Aopen+is%3Aissue+label%3Aauthoring). Feel free to [file an issue](https://github.com/microsoft/CsWinRT/issues/new/choose) tagged with the *authoring* label if you encounter any new issues!

> - The docs [here](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/uwp/cpp-and-winrt-apis/troubleshooting#symptoms-and-remedies) have useful troubleshooting tips for working with C++/WinRT.

Reviewer 2: en-us

> - The docs [here](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/uwp/cpp-and-winrt-apis/troubleshooting#symptoms-and-remedies) have useful troubleshooting tips for working with C++/WinRT.

Reviewer 2: en-us
